Going Home
	My favorite house is the first one we’d ever celebrated two Christmases in. It’s the house I picture when I feel like “going home.” I recently looked up my old address on Google maps, and as I navigated down to where my house was I saw everything was different now. Instead of my home, there is a tan, two-story house. The U-shaped driveway I rode my bike on, has been turned into a grassy lawn with two strategically placed palm trees, and the avocado tree that was the crowning piece of the entire house is now invisible. The home I knew is gone. Something that had seemed to me unmovable is gone. Could this be what my grandma who suffers with Alzheimer’s has been living through for the last 10 years? The only thing left from this house is my vivid memory of the summer my grandma moved in. As for my grandma, I’m grateful she’s forgotten the awful granddaughter I was, even if she can’t recognize me anymore. 
I remember climbing onto the roof of our house to escape my grandma. My niece, Lisy, and I had stolen a cantaloupe from the fridge. I say “stolen” because the cantaloupe was reserved for my older brother Ed. We were forbidden from eating any of the fresh fruit before Ed or any other adult had a chance to taste it first. The “No Eating Before Adults” rule came from my grandma. She didn’t explain it to us, but yelled it at us whenever she caught us eating the fresh peeled oranges, or brand new strawberries.
    “Don’t eat those!” she’d yell reaching for our helping what we had taken. “Your brothers, and uncles haven’t had any yet,” she looked at Lisy. “They come home from work, tired from being in the sun, and you brats just eat it like you worked to pay for it.” If we tried to reach for more, she’d slap our hands and yank our hair. She was, however, kind enough to let us finish the pieces we’d already started.
    My niece moved into our house when I was twelve, about to turn thirteen. She was eleven. I was in the seventh grade, and she was in sixth. My brother, her dad, had dropped her off for a sleepover at grandma’s, and didn’t come back to pick her up for three years. The sleepover was a necessary step to save his marriage to Lisy’s stepmom. It wasn’t until Lisy had her first child, that she felt the weight of that sleepover. Until then, Lisy had always thought back on those three years as the never-ending slumber party we’d made it. I didn’t mind sharing my room. I had gained a little sister and a best friend.
    Lisy and I spent our first summer together, outside. Our home had a covered up Jacuzzi that sat like a stage in our backyard. We weren’t the sophisticated types who might think of putting on a play in our ready made stage, but instead used it to act out what we loved to watch on TV - wrestling. We were wrestlers from the then WWE. We knew all the wrestler’s names and signature moves. Chris Jericho’s move: the walls of Jericho. The Rock’s move: the people’s elbow. What we didn’t know was that the fights were staged, and nobody was ever truly hurt. We also didn’t know that the ring was specially made to allow for bouncing, and the sound our covered up Jacuzzi made when we stomped on the wooden boards wasn’t the same sound we heard on TV. The ring’s sound was from a springboard that was meant to protect the wrestlers and create special effects. Our sound was from a hollow tub waiting to suck us in.
    Luckily, we were never hurt too bad; though all of us had our turn at the usual sprained ankle, or jammed toe. Once, when my dad’s oldest son came to visit, he lifted me into the air and dropped me on my back. The wind was gone from my lungs, and everyone was in awe that he could lift me so high off the ground. He was only four feet nine inches tall and 140 pounds. Even as a kid, he made up for his height by fighting with anyone and everyone. By the time I was 25 he’d been in and out of prison three times for minor burglaries or assaults.
    I was the oldest. My younger brother, Rene, and Lisy’s older brother, Dougie, often joined us in our matches. They liked girls versus boys, and I liked oldest versus youngest. I preferred my set up because Dougie was stronger than most of us, and he made up for my weakness. Even if I was pinned to the ground, we always won. He would take the two others in a matter of minutes, and we’d finish with a score of 2-1. Rene and Lisy caught on to my trick, and offered other ways to combine our teams. Sometimes we just had an old fashion free for all. The last man or woman standing was the winner, and I was always the first one down.
    Dougie and Rene were away at Boy Scout camp when we stole the cantaloupe. They would have been so proud of how well we pulled it off. Lisy and I were in the mood for mischief. We had gone close to a week without Dougie and Rene. Nothing seemed to scare Dougie or Rene, not even getting yelled at by our parents. They did what they planned, what they wanted, and they never thought through the consequences. Lisy and I wanted our own adventure, and we wanted that cantaloupe. More importantly, we wanted our annoy my grandma.
We had planned the whole thing while we watched TV. We would wait for my grandma to leave the kitchen and go to our bedroom. When she shut the door, we’d rush to the kitchen, take the cantaloupe from the refrigerator, cut it, and take it out onto the roof to eat it.
    The fridge was visible from the hallway that led to our bedrooms. We lived in a three-bedroom house, with an office nook we’d turned into a fourth bedroom. Each room had 2-4 persons sharing, with the exception being my brother Ed’s room. My parents’ shared a room, but the rest of us were split boys and girls. My older sister, my grandma, Lisy and I shared a room. Dougie, Rene, Juan Carlos, and Eric shared another.  The office nook that turned into a bedroom became Ed’s private bedroom. He’d earned a right to personal space, and somewhat more privacy after serving an honorable two-year LDS mission in Cochabamba, Bolivia.
    “You guys should try to be more like your older brother, Ed,” my mom lectured during our nightly scripture study. “All you do is complain. I see him reading his scriptures and listening to hymns because he wants to and not because anyone makes him.”
I would look at each the others to see who would roll their eyes first. I never did. I only pretended to be casual about the scriptures, but I was too afraid to be disrespectful. I’d read all the ways God punished the rebellious souls, and still I enjoyed reading the scriptures. I was good at it. I tried to be like Ed, even if my mom’s constant reminders and comparisons told me I was failing. 
I stood guard in the kitchen, watching in case my grandma might emerge from the bedroom. The house was empty of all adults except my grandma. I knew my older brother Eric was home, but he slept a lot in that time. He was sixteen ,only three years older than me, and already he had adult responsibilities. I knew he was home when the phone rang every hour with the same caller ID: Sarah Ramirez. His baby-mama would call, and he’d answer. She’d yell, and he’d hang up. She’d call back, and he’d answer. She’d yell about his hanging up on her, and he’d hang up again. The cycle continued until one of us answered, or we let the phone go to voicemail, or she was made to go back to her shift at Yoshinoya.
    Grandma, the only adult, was home and in our bedroom, probably re-packing her things and making sure we didn’t take anything from her. She’d started doing this after one of my aunts broke into my grandma’s bedroom in Guatemala. My mom had said that theft had changed her. Once grandma was done, she’d come out to check the rest of the belongings in the house. She’d make sure we didn’t break something or take someone else’s food. Lisy and I knew it was only a matter of time before we heard her whistling come down the hallway and into the kitchen.
    Lisy had taken the cantaloupes out of the fridge and was looking for a cutting board. They were next to the stove, a bit out of reach for her. She pulled out the stool my mom kept for her smaller grandkids, and stood on it to reach the cutting board.
    “Make sure the stove’s not hot before you reach over,” I told her.
She put her hand over the burners and shook her head. The burners were cool, and she could reach now. She put the cutting board on the stove, and reached for a knife in the drawer next to the stove. I kept looking back from her to the hallway. Grandma was still busy with her packing.
    Lisy pulled the cantaloupe close to her chest to steady it. She couldn’t get a good grip on it with the knife. She wrapped her arm around the cantaloupe, to reposition it. Had she cut down she would have ruined the cantaloupe with blood. I got nervous when I saw how poorly she was doing, so I told her to reach for a serrated knife instead. I should have taken it from her, being the older and wiser one. But I couldn’t trust that Lisy would hear Grandma, nor that she would get us out of the kitchen in time, should my Grandma try to sneak up on us. Luckily, the serrated knife worked. She cut the cantaloupe in half and no blood was spilled.
    We were about to scoop out the seeds, when we both heard the whistling. Looking towards the bedroom, I saw Grandma stepping out. I ducked behind the counter and whispered to Lisy to duck and take the cantaloupe.
    “Let’s go Lisy! She’s coming! Quietly!”
We kicked our flip-flops off so she wouldn’t hear our feet smacking against the tile in the kitchen. Then, we snuck out of the back door without saying a word. Thank God the backdoor didn’t creak like all the others. We hurried into the backyard, and started up the ladder my dad used to pick avocados from our tree. Lisy walked ahead of me holding one half of the cantaloupe, and I went up with the other. When I got to the top, I handed Lisy my half and told her I was going to move the ladder. Lisy waited with the cantaloupe as I repositioned the ladder on the sidewall of the house, just behind the gate to the front yard.
    The roof shingles were made of wood. The sun had dried up the tiles, and they crunched under our bare feet. The tiles looked like decayed wood you find at the beach sometimes, warm, dry, and good for a bonfire. A couple of times, I felt and thought I was going through the roof, but the tiles held. We walked toward the opposite end of the house. We knew that Grandma would be checking the kitchen, so we sat over the bathroom on the further side of the house to eat our cantaloupe. We squatted on the warm wooden tiles with our knees up like grasshoppers and the cantaloupe in our hands like a bowl of soup.
    “Don’t look down Rosy,” Lisy said. So of course I did. I felt the nerves in my lower back pinch themselves. My legs went weak. I thumped my butt on the roof and Lisy crouched like a monkey, laughing. From where we were at, we could see every house on our block. We could see the tops of every one-story house, and into the windows of the two story houses. The windows of our neighbor’s house directly ahead of us had open blinds. We could see a leather couch, and gold framed photographs on the walls.  
    The neighbors were friendly with my sister. The younger girl Jenny had a crush on my brother Eric. She was a year older than him, so she got close to my sister in the hope that she’d be invited to our house. She was, and she loved being with my younger brother’s and me as well. Jenny came over a lot to check on us when our parents were out, and to ask if Eric was around. We were always fine, and Eric was always sleeping, or out somewhere. She’d ask us about school, or our weekend plans, or something mundane like that. We’d tell her, and then she’d say, “Okay güiros see ya later!” She loved the word güiros. She’d learned that word, meaning kids or kiddos, from my exotic Guatemalan cousins.
    Helen was the only one who ever got to visit Jenny at her house. We never got permission to go unless Helen went with us, and Helen never wanted us to come. Later, when I found her diary, I learned that Helen and Jenny would spend their afternoons calling party lines, or the boys they had crushes on at school. I didn’t understand the highlights of the conversations she’d had, but knew they were something she wouldn’t want me to share publicly. I sat on that golden ticket for months, and when Helen had something I wanted more than she thought I deserved, I cashed it in.
    Helen liked being the only person to ever visit Jenny’s house. She got to see their big cars, TVs, furniture and house all by herself. It seemed like every other week Jenny’s family had a new SUV parked in their driveway. We rotated through cars on a monthly basis too. My mom brought the cars she was shipping to Guatemala for her customers to our house. The neighborhood we lived in was much nicer than the warehouse where she stored all the boxes and belongings she’d ship to Guatemala. The warehouse was in central Los Angeles and there was no way to get the cars into the warehouse without blocking the main road.
    “There are too many black people, crack addicts, and Mexicans waiting to take one of these cars in a careless moment,” my mom would explain. “But in Downey, there are still white people, so they won’t bother. The police still care here in Downey.” Being born here and my roots being Guatemalan, I never included myself, or our family, in her description of the neighborhood. Even if everyone at school always confused me for Mexican.
    I assumed Jenny’s family had a similar business. They probably couldn’t keep their customer’s cars in a safe enough warehouse, and so kept them here on our block, where nobody did anything illegal. Not as far as I could tell anyway.
It wasn’t until one weekend when their house was packed up into a U-Haul truck in a morning, and surrounded in cop cars in the evening that the stories would start emerging. They were drug dealers. They sold stolen cars. They sold stolen TVs from containers they’d jacked. They were part of the cartel. All Mexicans were. They were coyotes. They smuggled in people from all over Mexico and South and Central America. They sold fake identities. They were laundering money. Every story was as exciting and drama filled as the last.
    The truth of what they were would never come to light, and we would never see Jenny again. Within a month the house had been rented to a young couple with a dark brown pit bull that put our dog on edge. They were nice. They never lent themselves to gossip.
    Jenny and her family were still living in their house that day we stole the cantaloupe and hid on the roof. We were looking into their window, when somebody got off from the big leather couch. It was an older man, who wore a white wife-beater. Lisy and I watched, paralyzed. His hairline was receding, and his mustache thick and black. He must have heard us snickering, and giggling just moments before. He looked out the window as if trying to understand the noise that had disrupted his sleep. His eyes half open, he slid the window shut, and dropped the blinds. Could he have seen us? He was a potential witness. He could tell when my Grandma where we were if she went looking for us. “Oh please,” I thought, “let him fall back to sleep!”
    Lisy and I looked from the window to each other. Our hands were dripping with orange cantaloupe juice. We smiled. Lisy fell back on her butt, and we laughed. When we finally caught our breath, we continued to work on the cantaloupe.
The seeds had to go first. We’d been scooping out the seeds when the neighbor had shut his window on us. We’d been laughing at our pathetic throwing distance. I’d scoop out a handful of seeds, and launch them toward the street. The seeds scattered everywhere, and didn’t make it off the roof. Laughing, Lisy tried the same. She took a handful, stood up, and prepared to launch them. “Watch this,” she’d say, and her seeds would land near mine. No matter how hard we threw, those seeds weren’t going off the roof.  
    Finally, the cantaloupe halves were empty, and we took the first bites into our forbidden fruit. The orange juice that had been dripping all over the roof was now running down our chins and arms. The smell was sweet and refreshing. The cantaloupe was ripe and soft. We could have eaten the cantaloupe delicately with just our lips and tongues, but we didn’t. We used our whole mouths and all of our teeth. We ate like savages. At one point I remember hearing one of us grunting in between bites of the cantaloupe. 
    We used our bottom teeth to scrape off the edges of the cantaloupe. Our shirts were stained orange. Our arms and chins were sticky. I put my half down next to me, and stuck my hands together. They stuck and peeled off like an old piece of scotch tape on my finger. Lisy was finishing the last part of her cantaloupe. I was amazed that such a tiny person could pack in half a cantaloupe.
Lisy was skinny. I was two years and two sizes bigger than her. Besides, she had the sharp and thin features I was missing. Her nose was long and pointed like her mom’s. My nose was round and flat like my dad’s. Her anklebones were angular, just like her elbows, knees and clavicles. I was cushioned and with curvier arms, thicker legs, and wider ankles. From a certain angle, she even looked like my mom, her grandma. She was pale, and her veins were bright blue. Her hair was light brown. During the summer it lightened to a dirty blonde. My hair stayed an almost blue-black all year long. During the summer nothing about me lightened up, but instead got darker. 
Lisy finished the cantaloupe. “I’ll bet these go further than the seeds,” she said. She was holding her cantaloupe rind. I agreed. We stood up, and walked closer to the edge of the roof. We waited to make sure nobody was around to see. We prepared for launch, but just as we lifted our arms over our heads to release, we saw her. Grandma was prowling the driveway looking for us.
I watched Grandma walk across our u-shaped driveway with squinted eyes. Her hands were clasped together behind her back, and she whistled as she looked through the trees and bushes to find us. My grandma muttered. As she looked behind every bush and tree her muttering got higher pitched. I knew if she had the chance she’d pull our hair and hit us with whatever she was holding, as she squealed at us through her anger. She had been forced to go into the sun to look for us and that inconvenience deserved all the punishment.
    We stood frozen with our hands in the air. Our eyes widened and we lowered ourselves down to our squatting position in silence. I raised my finger to my lips. Lisy understood. Had we launched cantaloupe rinds at my grandma our summer would have ended that afternoon. It would have been the ultimate mistake. My mom would pull me into her room, and after yanking my hair and lecturing me, she wouldn’t have the stomach to hit me with a belt. She’d call in my dad for that, and she’d nag him until he’d lose it and the belt would land on all the unshielded parts of my body.
Lisy’s punishment would be different. My mom wouldn’t feel entitled to punish her, and neither would my dad. They’d call my brother and expect him to act like the father he neglected to be most of the year. They’d nag him about disciplining his child, and in the end he’d lecture her about the disappointment she was becoming to him, and he’d ground her. After his lecture, he’d get back into his car and go back to his family.
    Not throwing those cantaloupe rinds was the best decision. Grandma was still out there looking for us, and if she looked up now, the game would be up. My grandma raised her hands to the air in defeat. After a moment’s pause, she shuffled back into the house, and slammed the door shut. We finally exhaled. We sat with sticky hands, chins, and stained t-shirts, amazed at our luck. Lisy giggled first. I followed. We couldn’t stop.  We ended up on our backs holding our stomachs from laughing.
Still on the roof, I imagined my grandma walking into the kitchen and seeing our mess. She saw the juice from the cantaloupe leaking from the cutting board down to the floor. Lisy wasn’t the most coordinated cantaloupe slicer. The juice and knife and cutting board had been left on the edge of the counter ready to fall and land on an unsuspecting bare foot. My grandmother sighed in exasperation.
“Mendigas ishtas!” she muttered, picking up a rag to dry the leaking juice. She moved the cutting board and knife into the sink, and started cleaning up the spill. She cleaned the counter, the cupboards, and the floor. She noticed a trail of cantaloupe going out the door. She saw flip-flops just flung about the kitchen floor. She almost tripped over mine. She crouched down to pick them. She got up and moaned. Her back and waist were always in pain when she bent down to pick something up. I can see her hand gripping her lower back as she straightened out, to get a different rag to clean up the floor.
    My grandma finished cleaning the kitchen. Then, frustrated she started her search for us. She began by looking in the garage, which was parallel to the back door. We must be hiding in there, or causing some other kind of trouble, she thought. Then, she heard it. Clanking metal hitting the sidewalls, and several thuds on the ceiling. This was more than an avocado that got too heavy for it’s branches. She followed the sound.
    She left the kitchen and made her way back down the hallway and into the bedrooms. She opened every door quietly, and checked under each bed. She found Eric sleeping in his bed. He had the fan on, and his back felt cold and clammy. She covered him up. She moved like this between rooms, until she heard a louder thud coming from the bathroom. She opened the door, and waited inside to see if the culprits would come down and show themselves in the window. She waited and waited, but no one showed.
The loud noises on the roof, the trail of juice to the backdoor, the thud in the bathroom, she’d figured out that we girls had escaped over the roof and out of the house. Oh, she’d catch us this time. As quietly as she had come in, she now shuffled out of the bathroom, down the hallway, and out of the house. She didn’t slam the front door behind her, so we wouldn’t hear her coming. She put her hands behind her back, like she did when she was charging someone with the crime they’d committed, and walked close to all the bushes lining the windows of the houses. She looked behind the bushes, on the sides of the house, and down the street. She didn’t see us anywhere. She didn’t hear even the slightest rustle of leaves.
    The sun was hot that day. She wasn’t wearing the sun hat my mom had given her for when she went out to pick up the fallen avocados in the back yard. I imagine she felt the heat of sun bearing down on her scalp, and then gave up. We weren’t worth her time. Either way, she thought, we’d come back just in time for my mom to punish us like we deserved. She’d tell my mom everything we’d done. She’d tell my mom about the mess we’d left for her to clean up, and how together, Lisy and I made it our life’s mission to tease and taunt her all day long.
I don’t remember how we got down from the roof. Did we climb back down the ladder, or did we just crawl down the front side of the house? I don’t remember what happened next; if we were ever grounded, or if it became one of the things my grandma forgot in her early stages of Alzheimer’s disease. But, I do remember walking home one afternoon later in the week and seeing our work. The seeds on the roof were dried up from the sun, and the cantaloupe rinds were sitting where we had been. I had not realized how low the ground the house roof was until I saw the seeds and rinds. It felt as though I could reach up and take them from the roof. Had my grandma caught us in her peripheral vision, we would have been toast. Or maybe not.
    The details and events of the day are lost to my grandma now. They may have been lost to her by the time my mom came home that day. Her memory was such a fragile thing. The option to drive her past the old house is also gone. The house has been torn down and replaced, and with it all stories its walls could tell. I like to think that when the sun comes in at the right angle, and someone whistles in the distance, my grandma has a glimpse of herself on that hot afternoon. She can see herself so full of anger, so full of purpose, so full of energy, and laughs at her idiot granddaughters. 